JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
Humorist David Sedaris plumbs
his own diaries for his latest
book showcasing
life's idiosyncrasies.
Jeffrey Brown sat down with
Sedaris recently, amidst his
performing around the country in
some 120 cities.
JEFFREY BROWN: A 60-year-old
hugely successful writer looking
back at his younger self, the
one before the millions of
books sold, the countless live
appearances before adoring
audiences and often, in
his culottes, the regular
appearances on late-night TV.
On a recent morning, we joined
David Sedaris at the archives
of La MaMa Theatre in Lower
Manhattan, one of the
small stages where he
first told stories.
In a new book titled "Theft By
Finding,®MD-B" Sedaris offers
a kind of fractured portrait
of the artist behind
the stories, through
his personal diaries.
DAVID SEDARIS, Author, "Theft
by Finding": Trying this
persona on and that persona on
and, you know, trying acting,
and oh, now look, I'm trying
sculpture, and now, all the
sudden, I'm a painter. But
that you could kind of settle
on being yourself, completely
yourself, and have that be
the thing that works, is being
yourself, is, to me, incredible.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sedaris
was raised in a large
family in Raleigh,
North Carolina, and many
of his stories involve
his parents and siblings,
including sister Amy,
a well-known humorist
in her own right.
His colorfully titled story
collections, including
"Me Talk Pretty One
Day," "Dress Your Family
in Corduroy and Denim,"
and "Let's Explore
Diabetes With Owls," are
perennial bestsellers.
And NPR regularly replays
perhaps his most famous story,
"SantaLand Diaries," about the
time he worked as
an elf at Macy's.
DAVID SEDARIS: Twenty-two
thousand people came to see
Santa today, and not all of them
were well-behaved.
Today, I witnessed
fistfights and vomiting
and magnificent tantrums.
JEFFREY BROWN: That experience
appears in his diaries
beginning on October 31, 1990,
when he is told:
"Congratulations, Mr.
Sedaris. You are an elf."
So, you can't not
write and keep a diary?
DAVID SEDARIS: Well, it's funny,
because, sometimes, people
would say, oh, that's very
disciplined. But it's not a
discipline. It is a compulsion.
I should be out doing things,
but I have to write about these
people I saw at dinner the
night before. I have to write
about the bellman at my hotel.
I have to write about something
that ultimately doesn't matter
at all. But I -- I don't
know. I can't move on until I
get that down.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you
overhear something or you record
something in your diary, is
there kind of, aha, this
is something I can use?
DAVID SEDARIS: I flew here
from London. I was at Newark
Airport waiting for someone
to pick me up.
And I saw a couple, and they
were in their mid-60s. And
then she said to him, where's
the other suitcase? And he
said, what other suitcase? She
said, you left home dragging
two suitcases behind you. Now
you have got one. The other one
is mine. Where's my suitcase?
You lost my suitcase.
I thought, wow. I mean, I have
been in a similar situation,
right? And just the entire look
on her face, like, if I could
leave you now, or if I could
kill you now, I would do it.
And so I had to write about
that. Maybe one day, I would
write a story about arguing in
public, and those would
come in handy in some way.
But it's also, like, if I were
going to remember yesterday,
I flew here in an airplane and
I did this and that. But that
was really the moment yesterday
where I felt like I was living
my life, like I was in the
moment. I wasn't thinking about
the past or about the future.
I was just right there living,
visiting and listening, watching
those people have an argument.
JEFFREY BROWN: And that sense
is important to you somehow?
DAVID SEDARIS: Well, because I
spend so much time like living
in the past or the future.
I mean, I think most people
do, really. And the moments
when you're really present in
your life can be
pretty rare, really.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sedaris'
stories appear regularly
in "The New Yorker." On
the day we got together,
he was just finishing a new one.
So, in the printed stories and
on stage, you're presenting, in
some sense, a character named
David, David Sedaris,
right? Your family members,
your partner, Hugh.
Talking to you now, I'm
not sure if you think of
them as characters or you're
just writing yourself.
DAVID SEDARIS: Well, I think
people are people in real life,
but the second you put them
on page -- on the page,
they become characters.
JEFFREY BROWN: And how
worked over are your stories?
DAVID SEDARIS: Gosh, the story
that -- I sent in a draft this
morning for this "New Yorker"
story that we're closing,
and it's the 21st draft.
JEFFREY BROWN:
Twenty-first draft?
DAVID SEDARIS: Mm-hmm.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is it tinkering
over words or jokes or...
DAVID SEDARIS: It's tinkering
over words. I will go on tour
with, like, let's say three
new stories, and I will read
them and go back to the room
and rewrite them, and read them
and rewrite them.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what does
a story in the end have to
have to be successful, to work
for you?
DAVID SEDARIS: It used
to be about just racking
up laughs, right? But
I think you need, like,
some sorrow to give the laughter
a bit of weight. And that's
when you remember things.
Or that's when I
remember things.
JEFFREY BROWN: So people come
and they want - - you think
they want laughter, but you want
something more. You want
to give them something
more. What is that more?
DAVID SEDARIS: I want to
connect with them. I want them
to -- usually, it's the worst
thing you can admit about
yourself that most people
can relate to. Right?
It was so surprising to me when
I realized that, that when I
thought, well, if you write
about, say, your own jealousy,
people aren't going to think,
oh, he's a horrible person
because he's jealous. They
will think, that's me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Was there
always an ambition? Was there
always a kind of craving to not
only get to a bigger
world, but reach people?
DAVID SEDARIS: Yes. It's
all I ever wanted. It's
all I ever thought about.
When I go on tour and I'm on
stage and the lights come up
at the end and I see those
people, people say, oh, that
must be awful. You go on tour
and you go to 40 cities in
41 days. And then you have
the book signing. And that's
people standing in line to say
how much they love you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes,
for hours sometimes.
DAVID SEDARIS: And I
don't see any part of
that that's negative.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID SEDARIS: It's all
I ever dreamed about
like from age to 6 up.
JEFFREY BROWN: David Sedaris
will continue to tell his
stories and write his diaries
in his travels at home
and abroad this summer.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown in New York.